# Ezra Klein - Mamdani, Trump, and the End of the Old Politics

Ezra Klein  0:30  
The Democratic primary that just wrapped up in New York was a collision between two very different candidates On almost every level, ideologically, outside of insider name recognition, but it was also a collision, in a way that I think matters for much beyond New York City politics, of two very different theories of attention. Andrew Cuomo ran a campaign that was based on a tried and true strategy of buying attention. He had this gigantic super PAC with 10s of millions of dollars purchasing all the advertising money can buy, absolutely dominating airwaves with negative ads about Zoran Mamdani. In his own words, Zoran Mamdani wants to defund the police. Zoran

External Audio  1:16  
Mamdani is a 33 year old, dangerously inexperienced legislator who's passed just three bills,

Zoran Mamdani, a risk New York can't afford, paid for by fix the city. And

Ezra Klein  1:27  
then you had Mamdani, who was running a campaign on a very different theory of attention, a theory of viral attention, a campaign built on these vertical videos that if you opened Instagram, if you opened Tiktok and you were in any way connected to his ideas or to New York City, this was all you saw.

Zoran Mamdani  1:49  
So what's your take? I

should be the mayor New York is suffering from a crisis, and it's called Halal inflation. Did you know that Andrew Cuomo gutted the pensions of hundreds of 1000s of New Yorkers? Mr. Cuomo, and furthermore, the name is Mamdani, M, A, M, D, A, N, I, you should learn how to

Ezra Klein  2:05  
say it. Attention works differently. Now this is one of the core political theses of this entire podcast. It is laced through so many of these episodes, and you just watched these two incredibly different attentional strategies collide, and Cuomo got flattened. He got flattened. It was not close. There are things you cannot learn about how to win elections in other places, from a off year, June Democratic primary in New York City using ranked choice voting, but there are things you can learn about how tension works right now, and that's in a large part the subject of this conversation. Now I'm not a New Yorker, but I want somebody who is a New Yorker, is deep roots here, and who really understands political attention. And so I asked my friend Chris Hayes, an MSNBC anchor and the author of a phenomenal book on attention to politics, the siren skull, to join me. As always my email. Ezra Klein show@nytimes.com
Chris Hayes, welcome back to the show. It's great to be back.
So Zora mandani won the primary. He sure did. You just wrote a book about political attention, and this was one of the most attentionally sort of remarkable and innovative campaigns I've seen totally so I want to hear the sirens call analysis of the Zarah Mamdani campaign.

Chris Hayes  3:32  
So the first thing I would say about him is he genuinely came from nowhere. I live in New York City and spend between 16 and 20 hours a day, reading about and thinking about politics. And like, I knew there was a Democratic socialist Assemblyman named Zora mondani. I didn't even know he was running for mayor until he popped up in my Instagram feed or Tiktok, right? So at one level, like just to level set here, this is someone who had zero attention on him, who went from having zero attention to him to monopolizing attention in the race. And I think the way he did it was viral videos. It's the first time I've seen a Democratic candidate be totally native to the medium of our time, which is short, vertical video in the algorithmic

Ezra Klein  4:18  
feed. I want to play one of them here. This is one of the first times he came across my radar, which was this video he did right after the 20/24,

Zoran Mamdani  4:26  
election. Did you get a chance to vote on Tuesday? I didn't vote. And why did you not

Ezra Klein  5:43  
What struck me about that video when I saw it was so many politicians do communication in terms of what they are telling you, and a lot of what was fascinating about mom, Daddy's campaign was he turned the act of listening yes into a form of broadcasting.

Chris Hayes  6:01  
That's exactly what I found so striking about it. When I first saw the video, I didn't know he until you at the end where he's like, I'm running for mayor, I was like, oh, there's two things about it. One is the whole point is he's listening to people. And two, that is a very recognizable trope of this form of video, the guy on the street, like the infamous Hawk to a girl, is because there's a guy walking around Broadway in Nashville sticking microphones in people's faces. This is an established genre, so he's taking this established genre that has its own kind of like features and is familiar, and then he's doing this really innovative thing. I, as the politician, am not going to speak at you. I'm just gonna put mics in people's faces and ask them questions. It's incredibly effective.

Ezra Klein  6:46  
He is the first politician I have seen be native to the thing that is after what I think we think of as social media. Yeah, right. So there are a lot of politicians. Donald Trump is one of them. Bernie Sanders is another who, in a way, they were very dominant on Twitter, on Facebook, on a kind of mostly text based, high engagement, social sharing, era of media and the thing that's come after it with Tiktok on Instagram, you see it now more on x2 is much More algorithmic, right? You can come out of nowhere, much easier and very visual, vertical video, not primarily text based. Zoran was not dominant as a figure in like, text on X, no, it was videos. It was visuals. It was fucking the graphic design in that campaign was beautiful. Yeah, there's a great New York magazine piece about this, and always in a suit, right? So, highly recognizable outfit. I mean, he was very visual. Like, there was an incredibly consistent visual grammar, totally right? There are very certain filters on most of his videos. And then when he would do like videos about more intense subjects, like ice, they would take those filters off, yes, or make a starker one, right? His, there's a really mother is, right. Like an amazing filmmaker, exactly right? His sense of film and visual grounds was very, very, very strong.

Chris Hayes  8:10  
The last time I think I saw something like it would be Howard Dean with meetup back in 2004 or Barack Obama with Facebook, 2008 right?
Like or Trump on Twitter, Trump and

Chris Hayes  8:21  
Twitter, yes, you're right. That's a conflict. Yes, I'm thinking Democratic candidates, candidates, but yes, Donald Trump and Twitter in 2015 and the way that that his performance on Twitter became the way that people, a lot of people, came to know him right as a politician. One point I want to make here that I think it's important, I think we both agree on, is, with all these discussions, there's stuff that's new and there's stuff that's timeless, right? The guy is very charismatic. He is very politically talented. That would be true if he was running in the 1950s if he was doing Whistle Stop tours, like the guy could talk. He is a very talented communicator. So I don't want to over state the degree to which the medium is determinative. You could make short form videos, and they wouldn't work as well, unless you he's got ribs like he just does. The thing that's so wild about it, though, is that there's a perfect pairing between that charisma, that way of communicating, with the form that he used, and then the fact that the algorithmic social media means a thing can blow up.

Ezra Klein  9:28  
And I don't think you can talk about the Mamdani one without also like what his foil was. Andrew Cuomo and zuran Mamdani were perfect foils for each other, totally, like you could not have scripted it better, and Cuomo had this gigantic super PAC behind him, and there was this real sense, I mean, correctly so, from any sort of normal rules of politics, that how is Mamdani or anyone else going to climb uphill against the amount of attentional artillery that that super PAC could end? Would buy. And we know that they were just absolutely dominating the airwaves. 24/7,
basically, I cannot overstate to people outside the New York viewing area. Okay, how insane the rep the same ad. You know, what I saw this ad was, I saw this ad one time. I mean, I saw like, 17 times, of this one experience, yes, yeah, because I was at a bar and they had a TV on exact same one of the things that struck me the whole way through on the Andrew Cuomo campaign was how old its understanding communication was, and the idea at some point I would watch people talk about Cuomo as a juggernaut, and intentionally, in my world, he didn't exist. It exists. And in fact, I think this, and he was hiding from it, by the way, too. But

Chris Hayes  10:45  
like, that's another thing we get to is the sort of what mom Donnie was doing on social media through things he was creating. And then there was what he was doing on other media outlets, which is also the opposite of quality, right? Very much so. But on the first point to take a step back. I mean, people really have to understand that for probably, I'd say the last 40 years, there's this formula for how and I think it's true for both parties, but I know democratic politics better. You raise a lot of money and then you spend it on TV buys. That's what a campaign is. Raise a lot of money,

Chris Hayes  11:20  
spend it on TV buys, and that is how they choose candidates. Is, can you raise the money so that you can do the TV, SEC and the D, Triple C, who recruit congressional candidates? Are you candidates? One of the main things that they are testing means, can you raise the money? Yes. And what are you doing to raise them up? With the money, you are buying attention, and

Chris Hayes  11:36  
what you're doing is buying attention through 32nd ads that are going to run on the local news in the three weeks before the election. Yes, that is 90% of the campaign. The last 10% is yes, you got to go to you go to events and you shake hands. I mean, maybe it's 80% I'm sort of overstating a little bit, but, but you saw Cuomo just run this play, which was limit media availabilities. Only pick your spots, be confident that this enormous carpet bombing is going to happen, laid down the stretch, and it totally backfired. Didn't

Ezra Klein  12:09  
work, and I really want to hold on this for a minute, because you cannot buy attention now the way you once could. You can only earn it. This goes back to the conversation we had right after the 2024 election, because, I mean, that was also a period for all that. Donald Trump really did have a lot of money behind him in that election. Kamala Harris had more. She raised a ton of money. They spent a ton of money, and they absolutely did not dominate attention. Yeah, you were almost watching between Cuomo and Mamdani, an almost pitch perfect version of the old attentional strategy, yes, versus a pitch perfect version, exactly, of the most modern, native attentional strategy collide. And I do think the underlying product here matters. Chrome was just a bad product. He was a scandal ridden high negatives, very widely disliked former governor who had had to resign in disgrace, running against this sort of fresh faced figure. But it also was a real collision of these strategies in a way that I do think people should watch again. I'm the DSCC or the Triple C, I would start thinking not about who do I think can raise money, but who can raise attention themselves by being out there on all these platforms and actually creating things that are native to the places they're running in, which will be different if you're an Ohio Senate candidate, you know, or a Wisconsin Senate candidate than if you're a, you know, New York City mayor candidate, but Wisconsin and Ohio and Missouri and all these places and Kansas, they have their own things that people care about and their own cultures. And they also, just to be clear, how else are people getting information now? I mean, look above a certain age and among certain demographics, people still sort of like consume the news as the news in whatever form that takes, more and more voters, and particularly voters who are in that outer concentric circle of political or news interest that Democrats lost by 15 points in 2024 that Democrats have struggled to win, that you have to win if you're going to win. Ohio, those folks, how else are they going to know about you? They're not if they're not watching the evening news when you're buying your ad points, and they're not watching network news and they're not watching linear cable, literally, how do they find out about they're going to find out about you from from their phones? So well, how do you get to them? I mean, you really have to, like, think through this. Like, how will this person know that I'm running what my face is, what I look like, what I stand for. How will they know? And if you don't have a theory for that, that's other than we when we bought a bunch of points on TV, you're cooked. It's not going to work. We did this show a couple months ago about attention. It was after the election, and that that particular show got very wide. Uh. Distribution among Democratic politicians. Yeah, sure, you heard this too. And then so that some of them would come to talk to me later, and they were trying to do video, and they were and I have just thought a lot since then about why their videos are so bad, members of the Senate Democrats, and for that matter, the House Democrats, they have a lot of money in their campaign committees. They have a lot of money for communications. They could hire very, very good people. And it's actually not the case that you can't make an argument about, you know, the big, beautiful bill or something go viral like I know you can because I do it, and you know you can because you do it, and I just look at what all of their content looks like. And I think does nobody there have a sense of what they like to watch? Because definitely they don't like to watch this, but the absence of taste among people who are you've been political communicators well, but that's weird.

Chris Hayes  16:10  
Okay, I'm gonna, I'm gonna. Here's a structural answer to that question, which I don't hold me to. But here's the hypothesis, Democratic Party politics are really complicated politics of multiracial, multiethnic, multilingual coalitions. I think often the things that success in democratic politics selects for is skill at managing these coalitional tensions, which is a really difficult thing to do, like Hakeem Jeffries is very good at that. Nancy Pelosi is the best at it. No one, and I think including Nancy Pelosi would be like, I want to listen to a Nancy Pelosi podcast. Nancy Pelosi is not a great public communicator. He is a legendary, all time, great manager of coalitional tension. I think the coalitional politics of democratic politics select for people who are very skilled at managing these very different, difficult coalitional issues. That is a different skill than public communication to the northeast, okay, but let me, let

Ezra Klein  17:21  
me push on this a little bit. I think you're right about a hockey Jefferies here. Chuck Schumer, right? Absolutely. But you think about a Cory Booker? Yes, he's a coin skill. You think about a Chris Murphy, yeah, there are high level

Chris Hayes  17:35  
why can't they do Yeah, they are. He walks across Connecticut every

Ezra Klein  17:38  
year. Yeah, he does that too. Cory Booker, did the 25 hour filibuster, or not quite filibuster, but long speech, there is a dimension where I know they want to communicate. I know they want what they're saying to break through. They are willing to say things. I mean, Chris Murphy has been very out there on the level of alarm he is raising they're good podcast guests, right? If you were to rank Senate Democrats on how good they're on a podcast, Murphy and Bucha be high out there. Yeah, definitely. But I guess the thing I am saying is that the amount of agita I have heard Democrats express about the lack of a liberal Joe Rogan, whatever it might be, as opposed to understanding attention as not something other people gift to you, right, but something you earn yourself, or you look for as a skill in other people, yeah, or you have some other kind of filmmaker coaching. It's just the gap is so much wider than it seems like it needs to be at this point. And like watching all these people just get flattened by someone like Mamdani really speaks to it. Yeah.

Chris Hayes  18:43  
I mean, part of the question here, though, right, is, like, about like, being native to new forms? Yeah, like, I have made a few tick tock videos and, like, they're not that

Ezra Klein  18:53  
good. And I think by the media I've not seen,

Chris Hayes  18:56  
I think I'm a pretty skilled public communicator. Like, this is what I do for a living. It's what I've done for a long time. There are these, like, weird, you know, we talked about sort of grammar or like, there are these sort of differences of different mediums, formats, visual grammars at different times that I also think here's actually a key thing. I think you have to be a consumer to be a producer. And I think this is a huge gap. I really think this is a real problem. Now, if I started to get serious about making Tiktok videos where I like talk to camera, having watched a lot more, I would be better now, and if I practiced, I'd get better. But the sort of like textural sense Mamdani has for the format, you can't just, like, read some packet or just jump in from nowhere.

Ezra Klein  19:46  
Seems like a thing where you should be looking for certain kinds of talent. Yeah? That, I agree, right? There's a real. There's a reality that a lot of people who run for office are news anchors. Yeah? Mike Pence had been a talk radio host, yep. Carrie Blake, right, had been a news anchor, right? Like a lot of these people. Will have experience in front of a camera. And I just think you're going to start, if both parties were smart, they would be looking for people who have attentional skill. So one thing we saw here is that, yes, Mamdani was trying to make a selection about affordability, about material concerns, but Cuomo won the precincts with median income was under $50,000 What did you make of the somewhat strange structure of the coalitions?

Chris Hayes  20:28  
I don't really have a good theory on it, yet, the one piece of election analysis that has stuck out the most to me is this triangle that breaks down precincts by their degree of racial integration. Have you seen this triangle? It's so fascinating. So basically it breaks down precincts by how white they are, how black they are, or how other they are. This is by Census. So these are not the racial categories that I would use to describe you, but basically what it finds is that the precincts that are basically all black and then the precincts that are all white were Cuomo precincts, and the more mixed a neighborhood was in its racial makeup, the better mom Donnie did, which I find to be a fascinating result. Now that might just be a proxy for that might cost correlate something between the income stuff you're talking about. I mean, I think I understand my mom and my mom and I were talking about this, because she was, my mom was talking about the Bronx. And the Bronx was, like, a Cuomo borough, which is sort of ironic, because, like, if you go back to the whole like, opening bid of Mamdani, which is, like, I'm here in the Bronx, in Fordham Road, in this place that swung, I'm talking to people I'm interested concerns. And then, like, he, like, ran up the numbers into, like, DSA precincts, but he couldn't have won unless he made it outside those perimeters. I think, look, I think name recognition is part of it. I think the devil you know or familiarity matters to voters, often on the kind of periphery of an electorate in a Democratic primary. But I don't have, like, a good theory of why it was the case, like if it was, there are other patchworks that I could sort of theorize better than those. What do you think?

Ezra Klein  22:11  
I don't know either. I mean, I think you could come up with a couple of arguments. One is it maybe that's cross correlating something just that's just informational, right? Those voters were less attached to the discourse, not telling the algorithm they wanted to see a bunch of mom Donnie videos. They sort of know who Andrew Cuomo is. That's very mobilized by interest groups that used to be more powerful, but that were largely like the interest groups largest sign up for Cuomo, the unions, churches. Right? Cuomo did a lot of his campaigning among black churches. So you might be seeing something that has to do with almost machine politics and mobilization politics, which Cuomo is leaning on very heavily. There's also a crime and disorder question here, right? So if you're a voter making like $35,000 a year, you're living in NYCHA housing, you are much more exposed to crime and disorder than you know a voter in Williamsburg, making 100 and, you know, $37,000 yeah, Adams won, running against crime and disorder, running up the totals among, you know, working class voters. So we know that that politics is powerful. I have this sort of view that momdani could only have won in a time when crime had actually gone down quite a lot as it has. Because if this really was a big crime and disorder election, I think that that would have been a big problem for him, and he wasn't well trusted on those issues. Another is that this is a consistent thing we see in the data with left wing candidates. So I think you could just say this is something we've seen happening a lot. I mean, Donald Trump also won voters under $50,000 so that there are different things happening as you move up the income scale, where people are voting much more expressively,

Chris Hayes  23:47  
even though Mamdani tried desperately hard to run the most materials campaign possible. But,

Ezra Klein  23:53  
but politics is very expressive. It's not like a bad thing about it. It's reality. And

Chris Hayes  23:58  
I voted against my material interest in This mail gets to do that. Yeah, you

External Audio  24:30  
I'm Judson Jones. I'm a reporter and meteorologist at the New York Times. For about two decades, I've been covering extreme weather, which is getting worse because of climate change, and it's becoming more important to get timely and accurate weather information. That's why we send these customized newsletters letting you know up to three days in advance about extreme weather that could impact you or a place you care about at the times you can be confident that everything we publish is. Based off the most accurate, scientific embedded information available to us, because we want you to be able to make real time decisions about how to go about your life. This is the kind of work that makes subscribing to The New York Times so valuable, and it's how you can support fact based independent journalism. So if you'd like to subscribe. Go to NY times.com/subscribe,

Ezra Klein  25:30  
so I think you can cut politicians into these two categories. They're the politicians for whom you can identify a policy that stands for them, yeah, immediately build the wall for Donald Trump, right? That is a policy, but it is a metonym for Donald Trump. Medicare for all, for Bernie Sanders, the green new deal for AOC Mamdani had like, four or five, right? It was freezer rent, it was free busses, it was free daycare, it was publicly owned grocery stores. All these are actual policies, and they're worth talking about, but what they are is mimetic, yeah, totally. So Hillary Clinton, running against Bernie Sanders, had 70 policies, you know, or some very large number, but none that actually defined her. Kamala Harris. I cannot give you the policy that stands for Kamala Harris. The same is true for Brad lander and a bunch of the other people in this campaign. Which is obviously they didn't have them. They had, they had Brad lander had a depth of policy on his campaign website in this mayoral race that I only associate with presidential campaigns. It was so detailed, and a lot of them are great, right? Yes, Brad lander was my choice in the campaign, but I said this when I wrote this piece about him, that there are politicians who communicate about policy and there are politicians who use policy to communicate. And one problem with a lot of establishment politicians is they communicate about policy, and the people who thrive right now on the attentional networks use policy to communicate, and you can lament that what modern media is doing is flattening policy down to this sort of bumper sticker level of mimetic communication. And I kind of do lament it, but it's also true, like abundance, like, has been a big deal, but it's the word, and then there's all the stuff behind it, and that's a much more complicated set of conversations,

Chris Hayes  27:24  
but it cuts through, but if you don't have the memetic tip of the spear, yes, I mean, there's a question here that I think is interesting in terms of replicability, is like, how much that ability is structurally producible, and how much is just like telling someone to dunk a basketball, you know what I mean? Like, certain people have talents for things, right? Like, there is a question here to me about how much it comes down to talent. Like, people have instincts and acts for this, but you're absolutely correct about this. And I think to go back to that video, like, there is this kind of one plus one equals two thing happening there. He goes up to Fordham Road in the Bronx area Noel. It's like, right by where my mom grew up. In fact, I was just having lunch around there, Father's Day, and he asked people, and they're like, groceries cost too much. And then at the end, it's like, we're gonna try public grocery stores, grocery now, to be clear, the grocery business runs at margins of like one to 3% it's not private profit that's making the price of groceries more I'm not convinced that the solution is going to solve the problem, particularly in this case, which I think is sort of the most dubious. But it's also like, I don't know worth trying, and it also is an attempt to address people's concerns.

Ezra Klein  28:36  
I've had a lot of conversation people about publicly on grocery stores, and I basically understand this modest pilot of like five stores as getting caught trying on something right? I do think this gets to something very real. Are the only policies that can become memetic in this way, these sort of huge, sweeping conflict at their heart. They make people not like them. At the same time, they make people like them. Build the wall Medicare for all you know, ongoing rent freeze. Can policy be memetic? Can it be communicative and be good? I don't just mean be good because I'm not like, I think it would be great. Like, if you can pay for free daycare, terrific, right? I think you should have free daycare, right? So I don't want to just create a good, bad division here. Like, all good policy is complicated. You know, that's not, that's not my belief. But there is a way in which to survive. Mimetic products have to be simple. Yeah, memes are simple. The thing behind the meme might be complicated and good or bad or whatever, but for something to get energy, I think it has to be easily rememberable. I think it has to be big. It has to activate something people care about, and it probably has to be controversial. Medicare for All dominated. People forget this now, every 2020 Democratic primary was like just a lot of Medicare for all debate. Anybody who knew anything about what kind of Congress that Democrat was going to be facing, no matter who won the primary, knew we were not going to get medica for all Fauci here. Bernie Sanders campaign manager was on my show, like earlier this year or maybe late last year,

Ezra Klein  30:23  
by saying, like, we would have gotten as close as we could get, but we

Ezra Klein  30:26  
you basically, we would have, we would have expanded the age range of Medicare, right, right? Everybody knew it, right. But the reason that it could dominate so much was it unleashed controversial energy. Yep, there was a debate. Would you abolish all private health insurance? Were you willing to raise taxes on middle class Americans potentially salient, because conflict is potentially salient. Exactly, a lot of policy is built for compromise. Yeah, right. Well, committees are not built for compromise.

Chris Hayes  30:51  
We actually, I think we have a good tangible example in recent history, in exactly this context, from the mayor that Zora mandani says was the best mayor of his life that got the New York Times very mad at him, which was Bill de Blasio is universal pre K as

Ezra Klein  31:05  
a non New Yorker, Bill de Blasio sure seemed like a perfectly good mayor to me. I My kids in 3k I'm a

Chris Hayes  31:10  
deposit. Talk about universal pre K for a second. Universal pre K did have that memetic energy, simple and straightforward, like every kid in the city has to go to kindergarten. Yep. We're gonna make a pre a new grade below it, and this is informed by real empirical work that's been done, and we're going to have a tax structure that funds it and makes it happen. It was controversial time, there were lots of people said, there's a bad idea. You're going to put local daycares out of business. I mean, there was, there was conflictual energy around it, and then they delivered it, and I sent my kid, my first kid to it was year two, maybe that it was up and running. And I walked into this school that had been leased by the Department of Education that had formerly, I think, been a big Catholic school, there were like, Hey, this is, like one of the biggest pre Ks in the whole city is like, 20 classes. I was like, this is the most extraordinary accomplishment I've ever like, I can't believe you guys stood this thing up and that my kids going here for free every day. Like, so, like, so, that's an example. I just want to give an example of like, everything that you said. It was the medic policy. It cut through. It identified Bill de Blasio. It was one of the hugest things they got into power. They actually did it. It actually worked. That is an example of all of those things happening. And

Ezra Klein  32:30  
yet it didn't stop everybody from turning on Bill de Blasio,

Chris Hayes  32:32  
right? Because then it's like, what have you done for me lately if you don't have a here's the thing about that promise. I will say, if you don't have a kid that age? Like, it's highly salient to me. Yeah, for me, I was like, I was like, This is

Ezra Klein  32:45  
awesome. I see a lot of people, like on Twitter celebrating mom daddy's win. And I think Mom daddy's win is exciting, but I've said this before. Like, the downside for him was nothing loses a primary. Like, the bad outcome is it he wins and fails at governing. He cannot get the tax increases he needs from Albany. He does not control the tax increases he needs for this agenda. And Kathy Hochul has already said, No, she is very clearly, no, like raising taxes like this pledge, and she's not going to break it, so he's not going to have the money. It's an extended rent freeze. I know people do non profit housing same, and there are people who are ideologically aligned with Mamdani, and they do not think this is a good

Ezra Klein  33:23  
idea. Yeah, I know people not

Ezra Klein  33:24  
relevant housing feel the same way. I think over, you know, you do it for one year, okay, fine, but over an extended period of time, you will reduce the incentive to build that housing. You will reduce the incentive to care for that housing. He's like, Mamdani will say, like, Oh, you have these other programs you can apply to for relief. All that stuff is complicated, and you make a market less profitable be in and fewer people will be in it. A lot of the things like free daycare you probably just can't pay for, right? So if you set up these expectations and then you don't meet them, is it okay because your supporters know you tried, or is it a kind of like a structural thing, where you have set yourself up for failure?

Chris Hayes  34:06  
I think it's the most important question some ways. I mean, one thing I would say is, I like experimentation and new ideas. So when he was asked about the public groceries, I think it's in the bulwark podcast, and he says, like, we'll try it if it doesn't work, c'est la vie. Yeah. And I, I love that answer. Politicians never give that answer. They never give that answer. Like, let's you know, the person who really most embodied that spirit is FDR. If you go back and you read about, like, you know, the first 100 Days, like, they're just trying a lot. Like, we now think about FDR as this Colossus who remade the relationship between the citizen and the federal government, right? A lot of that stuff did not work. Like, fully failed. Like, a lot of the interventions failed. They did a lot of clunky stuff. Like, there was a lot of now, totally different time he had these enormous mandate. It was a crisis. But I. Will say that, like, I like the idea of experimentation. I like the idea of these ideas coming from outside of what like the consensus around sensible policy is, but the test for it is, can you deliver one

Ezra Klein  35:15  
thing that struck me a lot about Mamdani was his ability to listen to census zeitgeist, but also to listen to voters, right that the relentless focus on affordability, that was an act of listening totally and then being able to respond to it, and it's been one of my views for a while. It's actually is the introduction of my book, that we have moved into an era of politics that is going to be all about affordability, housing inflation, cost of childcare inflation, cost of healthcare inflation actually moderated in some ways, but it's still quite bad. Educational pricing, right for four year colleges, that kind of thing that had been building for decades. That is not a thing that happened in 2022 and 2023 that had been building for decades. And now, you know things are like they kind of rise and like they're an issue, and then like they're actually intolerable. Yeah, right. And so like future politicians were going to have to develop a set of ideas and a way of talking about bringing costs down, not just bringing subsidies up. And whether mondani is particular, policies will work to do that. That was the focus. Struck me as a politician native to this era of concerns. I

Chris Hayes  36:26  
mean, think about the rent freeze, right? He wasn't saying we're gonna give rent rebates through a tax filing where you file a tax and we'll give you $150 back. It was like, No, we're just gonna cap the price.

Ezra Klein  36:36  
The concern is whether or not, from a policy perspective, my body talks a very, very good I'm just in game like, I think he gets that you need housing supply, yeah, but his plans are all public housing, which is fine, but that's much harder. And and then when he talks about market rate housing, he's sort of like, as like, I really believe in market rate housing, as long as it accords to our sustainability, union and affordability needs, right? Yeah, and it's like, when you need a lot of housing, adding a lot of conditions for that housing is going to raise the price. And so I really think there's a question about whether or not he can deliver affordability. If he's not able to increase supply, yeah, I would feel bad about a rent freeze that was paired with an incredible explosion of building. If what was happening was, like, we were freezing rents and there were cranes everywhere, right? Yeah, okay, fine. Like, because maybe in three years, we have a lot of housing coming online, right? But if you at this level of supply creation, yes, you freeze rent for an extended period of time, you might begin to, like, construct supply down the road and create a bigger problem for the future. There are some levers we could pull on this. Housing is a particularly tough one, because it takes time to build houses, and we make it and we make it hard to build houses. I'm very skeptical that Mamdani can make free daycare happen. I don't think he's got the money to do it. There's more infrastructure that we need than was needed even for a 3k but you could conceptually do free daycare. Definitely do it nationally. There are ways to approach some of these things, but I think this is what politics economically is going to be about for an extended period. I

Chris Hayes  38:10  
think one one wrinkle to the housing question, which I think is really important thing to always keep coming back to and you discuss in your book, you know, one person's price is another person's income, and there's a real, genuine, material conflict in New York City between renters and homeowners. It's not false consciousness, it's not a distraction. It's not culture where bullshit like, if you own a home and most of your wealth is in your home, you want to see that wealth go up if you are trying to enter the housing market, or a renter, rising house prices are bad for you,

Ezra Klein  38:44  
and you will not be excited about Mamdani or anyone come in saying, We're gonna build a ton of public housing next to you. Like, that's the other thing that's very difficult about public housing and affordable housing. Yeah, all these homeowners who want their high home prices do not want that down the block

Chris Hayes  38:57  
and that and that material fight, you know, huge promise, which the homeowners have been winning in California have been beating the brains people trying to buy homes and renters for decades now, to a degree that's like, truly catastrophic. I think it's fair to say I do worry that the structural nature of public opinion now is negative in a way that makes even good governance not resonate with people? If that makes sense, or the structural limitations on govern one of the two, that it's just very hard because of how many things contribute to a working class person who lives on Fordham Road being like, Man, I am squeezed in every direction. Can Zora mondani unilaterally make it so they don't feel that way? It's hard to say. Can they feel that I got a mayor who's trying to make my life better?

Ezra Klein  39:51  
Yes. So translating this kind of communication from campaign to governance, not that many people have had to do. But Obama had to do it. And I think I would say he failed to do that. I think the sense is that he was an amazing, amazing, amazing campaigner, and then given the reality of incremental victory, he was never sort of able to narrativise. That's true in a way that could ease the disappointment a lot of people felt. And I think that's in some ways why the liberalism he represented after him, for at least some time, had a hard time, because he had raised hopes so high for a lot of people, and then it's like, you know, I mean, things did change. I'm a big fan of Barack Obama. The Affordable Care Act was a huge and ongoing achievement. But how do you narrative eyes the difference between people's hopes for your campaign and what they got. Donald Trump is interesting because he comes after Obama. He also makes huge, sweeping, wild promises Obama never did. They don't build the wall. But Donald Trump has this way of communicating throughout his entire presidency. And I mean, he loses re election, right? So it doesn't work exactly, but that he is. It's like somebody's a president, but he's not responsible for what happens at war with his own government, deep state. So there was a narrative that Donald Trump maintained as president that allowed him to explain away the difference between what he attempted and what he achieved. And now Trump is president again, and he has much more control over the government, so he's not it's not as much of a deep state narrative this time,

Chris Hayes  41:26  
although he has spent the last 24 hours railing against the intelligence apparatus. Yes, exactly like it's very classic.

Ezra Klein  41:32  
So yes, because they say that the Iranian strikes only set it back by a couple months. And he's saying it's false. So this one is like, can you use it as a form of power? But then is, can you use it if you're not being able to get it done, right? Can you narrative eyes, the grimy, gritty, just reality of governing in a way that maintains like the faith people have in you, even if you're not being able to deliver to them what you promised? It's

Chris Hayes  41:58  
I think, I think there's a few things I'd say about that. One, I think Mayor is different than President, a lot of ways, partly because it is much more retail. And you can get a long way by showing up a lot. I mean, Eric Adams actually does it pretty well. And, you know, I thought the

Chris Hayes  42:19  
you know. And this is, you know, this is Chuck Schumer's legendary talent, not as mayor, as Senator, but before that, as Congressman. There is a little bit of a just trap that is difficult to avoid, which is like it will be more difficult to govern than it is to campaign. Always. Andrew Cuomo, Father, quite famously, said, We, you know, we campaign and poetry and Governor pros. And I think that part of the way, I guess, that you escape that trap is talented political communication. I mean, I really do like, I think you have to do a good job. Like you can't be a total failure as a mayor, right? Like the city has to feel like there's tangible improvements in people's lives. But that alone won't be enough. You basically need both. You know, I thought the mom Donnie video to close out the campaign where he walks the length of Manhattan, and he's just like talking to people, dabbing people up, eating a slice of pizza, drinking water, like you have to keep doing that, I think, to be an effective mayor. And I think that does actually allow you to narrative eyes, yeah, because it's like, I'm out here in the streets and I'm talking to people, and I'm hearing what you're saying about what you're trying to do, and I'm communicating to you about what we're trying to do. The getting caught trying, I think, is sort of the key part of that. I think this

Ezra Klein  43:33  
gets something you're seeing with Donald Trump right now, which is he actually has an instinct for how to turn policy that isn't affecting that many people into something that is intentionally salient, yeah, which is to make it a performance. Yeah. He performs everything, including war, including war, the deportations, the sending people to foreign prisons, and having Christy noem like pose at them in her Flak Jacket. That there's a way that he feels to me. I mean, he's a genuine attentional innovator. Say what you will about Donald Trump and that he is trying to make much more of policy into a public performance. I mean, there is a reason.

Ezra Klein  44:10  
I mean, Dr Phil is embedded

Ezra Klein  44:11  
with the ice teams. Dr Phil is embedded with the ice teams. His cabinet is full of people from TV, be they reality TV stars from one period like Sean Duffy all the way over to the Secretary of Defense cable news us. So there is this way in which I think Trump has been trying to sort of square this, like most people, will not feel the effect of most of his policies. But what if he can turn those policies into programming,

Chris Hayes  44:40  
yes, but here's the irony, right, like he's at 10 points underwater, and like all this stuff's polling at exactly what you would predict from thermostat public opinion and from like, the use of the bully pulpit. I mean, David shore had a thing the other day about one of the most consistent, counterintuitive findings is that when a President talks about something, its negatives go up. Oh, yep, right, this sort of negative bully pulpit. Now the question to me is, and this is the thing that I think feels very unresolved, because of how sui generis Trump is, and how sui generis his trajectory has been, is like, does it net out as a positive, the question of attentional domination? He does it better than anyone. He is a genuine innovator and a weird genius for attention at a pathological and feral level that is not replicable, but the constant show the constant conflict, like his negatives are high. He lost reelection. He stuck around, he won, he almost immediately started to tank in the polls. He's a very polarizing figure. It works at some level. There's some power to it, but like, how much does it work still remains unclear

Ezra Klein  45:52  
to me. I think that's right, but what it works to do is set narrative, and that is its own dimension of power. It is a kind of power that he exerts in a way few presidents do over culture. And I'd say this is true, right? Mamdani as a discourse object. Trump is a discourse object, right? It's not like czar. And Mamdani is the only person to have recently won a Democratic primary anywhere in the country. In Jersey. Mikey, Cheryl, yep, just one new South member just won the primary for governor. Cheryl, I think is an incredibly impressive politician, a former Navy helicopter pilot, right? Like I find her very, very, very charismatic. Yes, she's very good. More on the moderate side of things, right? There was not a debate. Does every Democrat need to reckon with the victory of Cheryl and the way that right now, there's a discourse of, how does every Democrat, and possibly every politician, possibly every human being, need to reckon with what we just saw in this gene Democratic primary in New York City, the

Chris Hayes  46:54  
governor, you know, the former governor of North Carolina, Roy Cooper, who served two terms in a state that Trump has won every time that he's been on the ballot there and left with, I think, 55 56% approval rating. No one's like. We need to find the next Roy Cooper like, as like he was an insanely effective politician in very difficult terrain, and has none of these, like, attentionally salient qualities, right? And we talked about this last time, which is like, high risk, high reward, high volatility, stuff like, there are

Ezra Klein  47:24  
trade offs here. I guess this is where the question you were asking a minute ago feels like it bites to me, which is you're saying, Does this kind of intentional dominance net out as a positive? Right? It can clearly win. It can clearly win primaries. It clearly can help you exert a cultural and narrative force and an ideological force like above and beyond. Yes, what you would be able to do right? AOC is not the only Democrat who is like knocked off another Democrat in primary. She's not the only Democrat to win a house seat. She is incredibly salient as a national politician because of her ability to drive attention. And on the other hand, like I recently was talking to a bunch of various people in the sort of New Democrats caucus, which is like the more moderate House Democrats caucus. And one thing that struck me just talking to them is a couple of them are very talented communicators, but they're actually what most of them communicate in their bearing, in the way they are, is not flashy, aggressive, ideological projects, right? It's a kind of like, this person might coach your little league team, yeah, you know. And so these things could do work and don't work in different places. And I'm, I don't think we have a good way of answering the question of, like, when is it valuable to drive this kind of attention, and when is it okay?

Chris Hayes  48:44  
Not. So here's what I would say. I think one place where it matters is presidential politics. Yes, I think presidential politics like there's just no question that it matters at that level, and you need someone who is a insanely skilled communicator with an incredible appetite and instinct for attention. Kind of person who wants to go do three hour podcast interviews? Yes, I think if you have a person who's not that, you're really in trouble. The other thing that I think is worth considering is the valence of incumbent versus challenger, where I actually think this sort of is interesting to think about. I think this kind of attentional dominance works better as a challenger than an incumbent, sure, for exactly the reason we're talking about right so like we're seeing right now, Donald Trump recreate some of the thermostatic public opinion on immigration that he had the first term, which was part of what drove Democrats to adopting a line on immigration That was to the left of what their previous line had been, partly along the lines of how public opinion had changed in recoiling in horror at what Donald Trump was doing on immigration. So my point being here is that there are more upsides to downsides of the Challenger for this high volatility. The high risk, high reward, attentional trade than there are for the incumbent.

Ezra Klein  50:04  
I also think there's a dimension here where they work. This is very, very, very valuable in primaries. Yeah, everything we were saying a minute ago about policy that becomes memetic is policy that unlocks a lot of attention, usually through controversy, where some people really like it and other people really hate it. And what you're hoping to do when you unleash that kind of intentional energy, that kind of conflict energy, is that there are more people who really like the thing that really hate it. And the trade that you often see some of these candidates make is they are unleashing energy in the primary that might hurt them in the general. Yeah, yeah. So it is a often made observation about Donald Trump that he wants to underperform in the general. He's incredibly dominant at the primary level, but Trump and then candidates like him who are less talented than him back at candidates tend to underperform in the general, right? The view is that another, you know, I think a lot of people believe, and I'm one of them, Republicans, had run Marco Rubio in 2016 they would have won by more. And I actually think that's true. In 2024 also, they run Nikki Haley, if they run, probably even run DeSantis, they would have won by more, like the conditions were there for that. Trump creates a lot of negative attention on him in general elections. New York is weird in a lot of ways, but one is that the expectation is, if you have won the Democratic primary, you have won right? The fact that that is not a complete expectation with Mamdani speaks to the way that there's at least a belief that he will generate counter mobilization against him at a higher rate than like a brad lander would, than some of these other candidates, but it'll probably be okay for him in New York City, because, again, it's so dominated by Democrats. But this sort of thing where there's this question of, how do you stand out in a primary campaign, in a non representative electorate that agrees with you, yes, much more than the general electorate will. But then, if you've done that, yeah, then what do you do with these positions you've taken pretty if you're dealing with a general electorate that is not all the way to your side. So I always think, like, just to finish this one example, that is it in Ohio, when JD Vance ran for Senate, Mike DeWine, who's, like, an intentionally not very skilled kind of more older school Republican. He was governor. He won his reelection campaign that year by like 20 ish points. Vance underperformed in the Senate race. I mean, he won, but it was by 678, points. It was not an amazing performance, in part because he had taken very, very Maga positions. Now, has it worked out for you? Defense, yeah, but not in the sense that JD Vance over performs with general election audiences like this is where it's like, yes, it's an uncertain trade. A lot

Chris Hayes  52:45  
of the time it's a really uncertain trade. And I think to add one wrinkle here that I think is interesting and slightly Wheezy but worthwhile is that, you know, New York City has ranked choice voting. The ranked choice voting allows voters to rank five different candidates that created some interesting incentives that are a little different in this race that I actually think worked against part of what you're saying there, which is like being the biggest bomb thrower is the most distinguishing. But the way ranked choice voting works is you don't want to alienate other people's supporters because you want them to rank you second or third or fourth. And one of the things I thought was very interesting about how Mamdani navigated this, and I think huge props here go to Brad lander, who came in third in the sort of first round of voting, was that there was all these cross endorsements and this sort of collision building. So it wasn't just bomb throwing. Like, there's a kind of politics you see, particularly in Republican primaries, there's like, the rest of these people are sellouts, and I'm the truest Maga. You know, there kind of wasn't that Mamdani wasn't running against, like, the Democratic establishment. There wasn't this kind of, like, you see this amongst the sort of left flank of the Democratic Party of like, these corporate sellouts, like they suck. There was not very much of that. There was directed at Cuomo, but it was a pretty like, he cross endorsed other candidates as well. And I think the reason that's salient for the general is that it's yes, it's in a primary, but it's also coalition building, yes. And I think that coalition building actually ends up being extremely important in general, which, by the way, New York City had five straight terms of a Republican mayor. Let's not forget, yes, the idea that, like the expectation is the Democrat wins is like a fairly recent vintage, like Giuliani won twice. Bloomberg was three terms. That was 20 years in a row for public mayor. I

Ezra Klein  55:05  
I think some of his people will not like hearing me say this. I read Mamdani as a left pluralist, not a left populist. Yeah, I agree. Which is to say that people, I think, have very, very shifty definitions of populism, but in its classic definition, like, what actually makes somebody a populist politician is not that they believe in redistribution or believe that the working man is getting screwed a bit. It's that they believe that the system is built around like true people and then the like small, conspiratorial enemies of the people who are keeping everybody else down. And if you could just break through them and have your villains and destroy your villains, you can sort of hit the the more utopic politics you're looking for. I have seen many like right populists and left populists. Mamdanis, what struck me often about his affect, which I often thought was a bit of a tick tock effect, because tick for, I mean, it forgets, but tick tock was like its whole thing, and it doesn't really work this way anymore, but for a very long time, they were really pushing it to be a positive platform, yeah, right, like they positioned it algorithmically Yes, against what was happening on Twitter and Facebook and other things at that time, Mamdani always seemed much more motivated by his sympathies than his resentments, and Cuomo felt to me much more motivated by his resentments than his sympathies. And this also then played into the RCV dynamic you're discussing, which is, I think it would be natural to assume that these other more establishment, long serving New York politicians would be likelier to cross, endorse and work with the front runner, former governor, right, right, who could both, in theory, give them more because he was likely to be elected for most of the campaign, but also somebody they would have known better because he's been in New York politics forever. And to me, this was both like politically meaningful and substantively meaningful because it undercut the central argument of COVID candidacy. They all hated, and not all. Jessica Ramos endorsed him, but like, they largely really, really disliked him, like Brad lander really clearly dislikes Cuomo, and so do a lot of them, yes, like, they did not want Cuomo ranked. So it created this interesting space where the dynamics were not what you would have thought in a leading insurgent versus Democratic establishment race,

Chris Hayes  57:24  
and there's this validation role that ends up happening, yeah, which is like, if you're hearing that the guy's this, like, terrifying, scary figure who's an extremist, but then the other candidates in the field are cross endorsing with him and appearing with him, like it makes it much harder for that to land. And I think again, to mom donny's credit, I agree with you that he does not have a kind of like, I think it's well said, that he's sort of animated by synthesis, as opposed to his resentments. His affect is welcoming and pluralistic and also not like they're out to get me like he has. He really just does not portray that at all, which I think can be a real problem for a certain form of kind of left populist politics, like, it's a rigged system. It's all rigged. The fix is in the you know, which, again, he got $25 million dropped out of super money. Bloomberg wrote a $5 million check, like two weeks, like there was a little bit of a rig against him, but he did not let that again. If you look at that walking the length of Manhattan video, that's the affect there is welcoming and inclusive at all

Ezra Klein  58:30  
times. But this is where I don't want to over McLuhan, Marshall McLuhan everything, and say the medium is always a message, and everybody's shaped by their mediums. Because obviously a lot of people on Tiktok are in Article video who are not like zharmada here, don't even follow what I'm talking about. But I believe, I believe this strongly, that the rise of populist right and to a lesser extent, populist left politics all across the world all at the same time. I believe the single strongest force there was not just immigration, and it wasn't, I mean, you can really look at this in the data. It was not economics. I think it was the rise of the central communication platforms of politics being high conflict, high engagement, compressed text platforms. And I think those platforms, in a way that we do not have incredibly good even language for are somewhat illiberal in their design, that they are and by that, I mean that they are structured in a way that makes the fundamental temperament of liberalism hard to do. They're not well suited for deliberation. They're not well suited for tolerance, right? They're not well suited for on the one hand, on the other hand, right? The things that make deliberative liberal democracy kind of function, those habits of mind, the way you hear when like Barack Obama, Barack Obama is not good at Twitter, just not as Twitter is bad. No, he's not. It's terrible because there. About groups. They're about engagement, like, within and then against other groups. They're about like, drawing these lines very, very carefully. And I think they just create, by nature, a more populous form of politics, or at least they create a communicative structure of politics where it is easier for outsider, populist politicians to thrive. The thing coming after it, which I don't know if it will hold this way, but this kind of vertical, like when you look at Tiktok, when you look at Instagram reels, again. It's not that no content is high conflict, political content, but most of it just isn't. It's much more like day in the life stuff. It's very highly visual. It's and you just kind of saw that a little bit that's really in this campaign. I think there was something in the grammar of Mamdani, yeah, that was so inflected by that era. I mean, he's, like, really, our first vine politician, yeah? Like, I mean, forget all this, but I think there was something there. His grammar was not Twitter's

Ezra Klein  1:00:55  
grammar. Kind of goofy kind of

Ezra Klein  1:00:57  
grammar. Was

Chris Hayes  1:00:58  
Tech Talks grammar, yeah, I think that's a really interesting point. I mean, I'm sort of thinking this through. So I think I agree that social media has constituted over the last decade is structurally illiberal. I think I agree with that relentlessly, algorithmically competitive attention markets are going to drive towards the parts of us as ourselves, that are the furthest from deliberations. Yes, right. So, like, I have a whole chapter in the book about Lincoln Douglas debates. It's like how different that is, not that you know, not that that should be the model for everything. So I agree with that. I think it's I'm sort of thinking through this idea of the visual grammar and kind of like affect of the vertical video as being less conflict populist in its nature, which I think is really interesting idea. I mean, one thought I had, and you just said that about Barack Obama's bad at Twitter is that it was funny. I watched the whole Mamdani speech, and I was like, it's fine. He's not great at giving a speech like Barack Obama was great at giving a speech. That is not his

Ezra Klein  1:02:06  
metric. There are great one minute clips into speeches, though there

Chris Hayes  1:02:09  
are great one minute clips in his speeches. But like his vertical video performance is a 10 of 10, his speech performance was not a 10 of 10 to me. And I think that speaks to something about the nature that I think you're right that like, I guess the one here's the one counterpoint, I would say, it seems to me like there are ways in which those algorithms over time. And partly, this is partly, this has to do with the weird black box the algorithm, right is they do start to get more and more conflict embracing because the like, clap back video, and the posting of the comment of someone said something, and then you, you, like, respond to the comment, and it's up there in a window, and the stitching, like stitching, became this thing that, like, really generates conflict. Like, here's this, like, dumb, clueless person saying this thing, and I come in and I stitch and talk about how stupid they are. So I do think there is still that incentive. But I think you're right that overall, the vibes, directionally in vertical video right now, are more positive than the vibes of, say, the cesspool that is x. It's also the

Ezra Klein  1:03:17  
other thing here, just reality is it's more capacious. I mean, the fundamental reality of the Twitter text box. I mean, it's a little less true now, but it still is basically true, is it? It's a compression mechanism, yeah, and the move towards language podcasting, we're just like sitting here vibing for two hours, you know, or longer, right? I was amazed, you know, I knew this was out there, but on the abundance for I went and did some of these podcasts. Like, they really free, man, they really keep doing you really do three to four hours. But even in this, like, what you can do, like you can put up six minute videos. I mean, I have videos that go out on Tiktok that are 612 minutes. Actually, a lot can be in there. Yeah, it is compressed compared to the Lincoln Douglas debates, but it is a lot less compressed than what the original Instagram box allowed you, yeah, than what the, you know, dominant for a very long time Twitter box allowed you, than what a Facebook post offered. And then, I mean, what Mama died shooting a ton of, was podcasting, yeah, right, well, and then getting clipped from that, and then it gets clipped, but it does come in the context, you know, of these sort of much longer conversations that create a different vibe between people. You know, I actually find it very hard to maintain. I've had many people in to this show because they are such harsh critics of me, and I find that they find it very hard to maintain the criticism when you're in a sort of extended social

Ezra Klein  1:04:47  
dynamic, devious of you. I

Ezra Klein  1:04:50  
have to, like, cue them. Remember, you hate, right? Like, we're here to talk about this, but these things you just really see when you do that, like, how much mediums shape us all. Yeah, is. Much harder to be a jerk to somebody's face than it is on under these dynamics. And so it's not that it's all like all vertical video is going to be sunny, right? It just is going to be different in ways that I'm not even sure we're quite ready to understand

Chris Hayes  1:05:14  
in politics. Yes, I totally go with that. And I also think that, like, you know, this is I'm just sort of spitballing here, so I can hear already in my head, the academics who study this being like, you're totally wrong. But let me just throw this out, like we've got the kind of, like, semi apocryphal story of the 1960 debate with Nixon and Kennedy, and how people listen thought Nixon won, and people that watched thought Kennedy won. And like,

Ezra Klein  1:05:35  
if you go watch that debate, Nixon has just not looked that bad to me. No, I've done this a few times, and Nixon looks

Chris Hayes  1:05:39  
totally the reason I say apocryphals, and I'm not even sure it's true, it's sort of become this kind of mythos about how this works, and it's capturing the central sort of McLuhan insight about, like, how much the medium structure says there was this kind of there's a sort of pre literate politics in America when you have very small percentage of voters who can actually read, then you have, like, the beginnings of radio politics. And, you know, people know about the fireside chat television is totally transformative to American politics. The first wave of internet politics that lasts for a very long time is written politics. It's the politics of text. I mean, all the stuff that's happening with like blogs when we came up and, you know, Facebook posts and all this stuff, we are now moving like we're going through this transformation where everything will be video. I mean, at least for the foreseeable future. Who knows these trends change on a dime? I think it's interesting to consider what that does the media strategy too. Okay, I'm recruiting candidates, people that can get attention. Those aren't going to be scarier propositions, because part of attention is sometimes conflict, provocation, views that are not boring, that jump out at you, and interviews and talking to a lot of people where you might say something that is a quote, unquote gaffe or that people don't like or offend certain people. The institutional orientation of Democratic Party is like, yeah, no. And I think there's a great example of this with Mamdani down the stretch. If talk about his media, he went everywhere. He said yes to everything. He gave an interview to a Pakistani news channel in Urdu. Have you seen this? No, at some level. I was like, why are you doing this just down the stretch, just like in the last week? But it's like, right? Maybe that gets back to Urdu speaking New Yorkers who share the clip. Like, you know, he then also goes on mainstream, he goes on alternative, he goes on subway ticks, and then he does the bulwark. Now, the bulwark is like, sort of a, you know, centrist, center right, anti Trump Network.

Ezra Klein  1:07:41  
Center left, I'm at this point. Okay, fine. Center left, at this point, it's in the big I love the boy Tim mill is great, but it's in the big Democratic it's in the anti Trump

Chris Hayes  1:07:50  
tent. In the anti Trump it's strongly in the anti Trump tent, but it is founded by people who used to be Republicans and whose feelings about say Israel tend more towards the right of the Democratic coalition, and they asked him this question about this phrase, globalizing Intifada, which is a very

External Audio  1:08:07  
popular phrase at protests on the left. And maybe some people say that phrase with good intent, but there's certainly some people who are saying that phrase with violent intent. So I wonder what you think about that.

Chris Hayes  1:08:19  
He gives an answer that starts off with, I thought a very long and good thing about Jewish safety and the Jewish folks that he's talked to in New York City.

Zoran Mamdani  1:08:26  
And just a few weeks ago, I had a conversation with a Jewish man in Williamsburg who told me that he the same door he would keep unlocked for decades is one that he now locks out of a fear of of what it what could happen in his own

Chris Hayes  1:08:40  
neighborhood. And then he basically says, Look, you know, Intifada is Arabic for struggle, and that, in fact, word is used in the Holocaust Museum website to mean struggle. The

Zoran Mamdani  1:08:50  
very word has been used by the Holocaust Museum when translating the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising into Arabic. It's a word that means struggle, sure, and as a Muslim man who grew up post 911 I'm all too familiar in the way in which Arabic words can be twisted, can be distorted, can be used to justify any kind of meaning. And I think that's that's where it leaves me with a sense that what we need to do is focus on keeping Jewish New Yorkers safe, and the question of the permissibility of language is something that I haven't I haven't mentioned the headline that comes out

Chris Hayes  1:09:31  
from it. I don't think it was a great answer to be very clear is refuses to condemn globalizing Intifada. And so I thought to myself, I'm like, oh, okay, so now we're seeing the cost, right, like we've seen the benefit. He's been everywhere, but going everywhere means you might have a news cycle where you say something like that, and I think it's pretty striking that he won anyway, because I do think the old way of thinking is like, say no to 10 things if it means. You never have the news cycle about globalizing Intifada and him embracing the strategy he did meant that he had a news cycle in a city with a million Jewish voters, where, like, people's views on this can be very strong. That was all about him refusing to condemn globalizing Intifada a kind of nightmare scenario, or for your political staffer on that campaign, a genuine nightmare scenario that didn't

Ezra Klein  1:10:23  
have the effect that I think a lot of people would have, implies the politics of that not what people think they are. Yeah, I will say. I will only speak for myself on this. So my priors on Andrew Cuomo, I was not like an incredible fan of the governorship from afar, back when he was being talked about as a presidential candidate, and then everything that happened led to his resignation, struck me as really kind of upsetting. But I was sort of, you know, I'm open to people's redemption. Like, I think you have to be open to redemption. Two things about that campaign. One was that the number of people, even people who endorsed Cuomo, who talked to me about his cruelty or is tendency for revenge?

Chris Hayes  1:11:02  
Like, I have that amazing sentence, I had somebody

Ezra Klein  1:11:05  
tell me he was a sociopath and then endorse him a couple of days later. And so that was, like, one line that I just couldn't get over, right? Somebody who this is a way they've treated people in public life like, that's a bar I don't I want candidates to be above. But the other thing that, like, actually closed it that made for me that would not rank him, was the way he used Israel in the campaign. Like, I am a Jewish person. I have very, very deep feelings about what is happening in Israel and Gaza, and I found it so cynical, so repulsive, just such a vicious way to weaponize. I thought both sort of mamdanis ethnicity, but also, I don't know what's happening. Gaza is a horror. People should be horrified. Like the whole thing just struck me as critics, and I knew a lot of people for whom it it read that way, that way. The thing in the debates with a gun to a fight over like visiting Israel. What's the first

Ezra Klein  1:12:05  
country you're going to visit? Mr. Mamdani,

Zoran Mamdani  1:12:07  
I would stay in New York City. My plans are to address New Yorkers across the five boroughs and focus on that. Mr. Mamdani, Can I just jump in? Would you visit Israel? Mayor? I've said in a UJA questionnaire that I believe that you need not travel to Israel to stand up for Jewish New Yorkers, and that is what I will be doing as the mayor. I'll be standing up for Jewish New Yorkers, and I'll be meeting them wherever they are across the five boroughs, whether that's in their synagogues and temples or at their homes or the subway platform, because ultimately, we need to focus on delivering on their concerns. Yes or no, do you believe in a Jewish state of Israel? I believe Israel has the right to exist, not as a Jewish state, as a state with equal rights to exist

Ezra Klein  1:12:50  
as a Jewish state. His answer was, No, he won't visit

Ezra Klein  1:12:53  
Israel. I said that. It

Ezra Klein  1:12:56  
was such an obvious political game.

Chris Hayes  1:12:59  
Yeah, it was cynical. It was, yeah, it was deathlessly cynical, yes. And I have to say, I mean, it was also comical at a certain level, like my formative years were spent at, like, Shabbat dinner at my friend's houses, and going to bar mitzvahs, and being in this milieu of Jewish New York, and it's incredibly precious to me, and I feel like incredible, like profound gratitude and affection for that. And you know, my wife's half Jewish, like I'm not, like doing the bona fides, but it's close to me, like I'm not Jewish, but it's a culture that I like, love deeply and feel bound to. And so, yeah, I found it deathlessly cynical. Deathlessly cynical. The other thing that complicated this, and this is an interesting angle of this whole thing, is that Andrew Cuomo, like me, is paisan from New York. The guy's not Jewish.

Ezra Klein  1:13:53  
Brad lander, who crossed endorse mom, Donny, is Jewish and very devoted to questions around Israel. He's also the highest ranking Jewish official in New York City. Yes, a lot of the things that happened in this campaign happened on like, a literal level and a metaphorical, symbolic level at the same time. And one thing that I thought about that moment when Mamdani didn't condemn globalized Intifada was it had this quality of this is what he believes he is not going to sell out a politics and a community who he either belongs to or has very, very deep sympathy for why they feel the way they do, and with Cuomo like I'm not saying he's not, does not have like beliefs about Israel, but it felt like the OPPO researchers had come to him with a packet, and he was now going to use what was in the packet. And a lot of things are not I mean, we could talk about the popularity of different ideas, but some things are also just communicating what kind of person you are. But also, I have been very interested by the way that Israel and Gaza have become highly kind of symbolic. Like, like attentional in both directions, right? There is the gossip genocide, you know, direction, and also the people who have made themselves aggressively into like moderates, anti leftist moderates. And he says a bit with Cuomo, but you see it with Richie Torres, right? You see with John Fetterman is like, the strongest and most consistent fight they pick is on Israel.

Chris Hayes  1:15:25  
It's like now, weirdly, the ideological Israel mediator, Israel's become the culture war,

Ezra Klein  1:15:30  
I think the party, yeah. And if you want to really send a strong signal, like, I'm just struck by how many of the signals sent for people who do not have a lot of power over, you know, American policy, but zero are sent on on this issue.

Chris Hayes  1:15:46  
And I think there's also an added dimension to that, which is that there's just enormous estrangement between the establishment of the party and the base of the party. That's right, I saw the polling on the Iran strikes were like 85% of Democrats opposed, and I think 13% approved. Now if you looked at Democratic legislators responses, you would not think that those were the numbers. Donald Trump really exploited a huge gap between the elites in the party and the establishment on immigration and trade and the base of the party to tremendous effect, there is something like that in the Democratic Party right now. On the issue of Israel, there is just poll after poll after poll. And I think this has to do with a bunch of complicated factors, although I think the driving factor has been the war in Gaza since October 2023 and I think you really saw it play out in this race. I mean, New York City is the most Jewish city in the country and the most Jewish city in the world, one of the most Jewish cities outside Tel Aviv. It's the second, you know, highest number of Jewish citizens. It's also like that number fails to represent how Jewish the city is in terms of its cultural milieu and like the fabric of New York, right? And I think it's shocking to a lot of people, and even to me, I have to say that someone with his politics on this conflict just won a Democratic primary and

Ezra Klein  1:17:10  
did it without shifting from that like no he used to support defund the police, and now I think both says he does it and actually does it. He does not want to defund the police. As mayor,

Chris Hayes  1:17:20  
he is. He held his blood. He is an anti Zionist, I think, and is now

Ezra Klein  1:17:24  
right. He said, like, Israel should not be a Jewish state, yeah.

Chris Hayes  1:17:30  
I mean, I think that I feel a little weird about this conversation, because I really it's thorny for a million reasons, but it's also like, I respect the views of people that are closest to it, and I am not the closest to it, so I'm always kind of like trying to check that in me. So it's weird for me to be like, it's better for the Jews. I'm not a Jew. I think the way this is developing within Democratic Party is kind of dangerous. Yeah. I think the idea of like, this is a signifier of the rich elites who control everything behind closed doors, which is both an anti semitic trope and something that touches on something close to being true about how money flows in democratic politics is like a really combustible mix.

Ezra Klein  1:18:18  
That's right, but I see two other things about it being a signifier. One is it? It's a signifier in two directions, right? It's a signifier in one direction of being willing to stick to your beliefs that I think a lot of people in the base feel, that even Democrats who actually agree with them will not say on Gaza and how bad and horrifying that has been, will not quite say it or sugarcoat it, or will not vote with it. And so there is something both, again, I believe the belief is authentic to Mamdani but, but also it's expressive, showing that you will stand up to that kind of pressure. Right? In the other direction, it's showing that you will not be cowed if you're Richie Torres is your fettermans. It's showing you'll not be cowed by a different thing. Yes, exactly, right. So it's become a kind of declaration of independence to signify that, I will just say on the point you just made about how saying something true can veer close to saying something anti semitic. One thing I have just appreciated about Mamdani, and I appreciate about the Mamdani lander Alliance. I'm a Jewish person. It is very important. It is very important that is possible, and understood to be possible, that you can be anti Zionist without being anti semitic. And I'm not anti Zionist in that way. I'm like a kind of two state solution person who doesn't really believe that that is possible. And I'm not sure where I what I think is plausible at this point. But putting my own politics aside, I very fundamentally believe, like Mamdani, is anti Zionist and not anti semitic. And he did a very, very, very good job, in my view, in answers, of making that clear, lander acted as a very important cross validator for him. But in a world where Israel is going to be as you. Brutal as it has been in Gaza, and is going to play much more of a role of like a regional hegemon militarily, which is what it has stepped into. And people are going to have very, very strong opinions, including very, very strong negative opinions on what it means for there to be roughly 7 million Palestinians who do not have equal rights and are under Israeli control. It is very, very, very important that you just have to be able to be against what the Israeli state has become, and not anti semitic. I think it is an incredibly dangerous game that pro Zionist people have played trying to conflate those things, because if you tell people enough that to oppose Israel is to be anti semitic, that's something to say.

Chris Hayes  1:20:44  
Well, then I guess I'm anti semitic. Yeah, that's fear. I think that the taboo around anti semitism, which is born of the worst atrocities in human history, is like a wildly important taboo that is breaking down everywhere we look. Let's be clear. Like that taboo is disintegrating, yes, and it's just integrating for a lot of people, and it's terrifying that it's disintegrating. And I, you know, the one thing I'll say again, and this is me, like, offering advice to no one asked for from the position of, just like, you know, the Catholic boy from the Bronx who now lives in Brooklyn, but like, I think there's tangible, concrete things that mondani can do. He should be going to Borough Park, and he should be going to Ocean Parkway, and he should be talking to folks there, and being like, we're not going to agree on Israel. Let's just say that from the beginning, I want you to feel safe and heard. I want your communities to thrive. I want the city to work for you. Let's talk about how we make that happen. And I think they're tangible, like there's huge security concerns,

Ezra Klein  1:21:42  
huge Have you heard of mom Colbert? I thought he did a very beautiful job walking that line. Yeah, I

Zoran Mamdani  1:21:46  
agree. You know, I remember the words of Mayor Koch. She said, if you agree with me on nine out of 12 issues, vote for me. 12 out of 12. See a psychiatrist and and I had an older Jewish woman come up to me and benign gesture in a synagogue many months ago after a Democratic Club forum, and she whispered in my ear, I disagree with you on one issue. I'm pretty sure you know which one it is, and I agree with you on the others, and I'm going to be ranking you on your on my ballot. And I say this because I know there are many New Yorkers with whom I have a disagreement about the Israeli government's policies, and also there are many who understand that that's a disagreement still rooted in shared humanity. Because the conclusions I've come to, they are the conclusions of Israeli historians like Amos Goldberg. They are echoing the words of an Israeli prime minister, Ehud olmer, who said just recently, what we are doing in Gaza is a war of devastation. It is cruel, it is indiscriminate, it is limitless, it is criminal killing of civilians. These are the conclusions I've come Steven. I know

Ezra Klein  1:22:44  
this good place to end. Also, final question, what are three books do you recommend to the audience?

Chris Hayes  1:22:49  
This is an oldie but a goodie. The Name of the Rose by Umberto echo, which is the most recent novel I've read. It was one of these things that I started put down for months and then took back up. And you know how you do that with novels? Or you're like, I sort of remember where we are, but the book is incredible. The second one is an incredible book that is not out yet that I am able to read an advanced reader copy of. It's by Rob Malley and Hussein Aga. It's called tomorrow's yesterday. Jessica recommended the last episode too. It's really something else, partly, it's beautifully written. It's two people that have genuinely incredibly distinct perspectives on the Israeli Palestinian conflict, and who have been in the room, yes, at a bunch of times. So that that is a great book. And the last book is a history of the Cultural Revolution called Mao's last revolution, by Michael schoenhaus and Roderick mcfarqua. And I don't know why I suddenly was seized with an interest in reading about the cultural revolution, except that I was looking to escape to a political environment that was, like, more dire and toxic than our own reading. So I was like, for some reason, like, scrambled that and I read that book's amazing, although, I mean, my God, sort of suffocating, in some ways, to be inside that universe. And then there are, like a few, with the familiarity that are unnerving.

Ezra Klein  1:24:13  
Chris has always such a pleasure, man. Thank you. Loved it.

Ezra Klein  1:24:22  
You this episode of his recline. Show is produced by Roland Hu and Jack mccordick, fact checking by Michelle Harris, with Kate Sinclair and Mary March locker. Our senior engineer is Jeff gelp, with additional mixing by Ahmed Sahota and Isaac Jones. Our executive producer is Claire Gordon. The show's production team also includes Marie Castillon, Eliza isquith, Marina King, Annie Galvin, Jan Coble and Chris dilin. We've Original Music by Pat McCusker, audience strategy by Christina simulowski and Shannon busta. The Director of New York Times opinion audio is Andy rose Strasser. You

